README.rst, before:

django-gm2m
===========

|copyright| 2014 Thomas Khyn

Django generic many-to-many field implementation.

This django application exposes a ``GM2MField`` that combines
the features of the standard Django ``ManyToManyField`` and
``GenericForeighKey`` and that can be used exactly the same way.

It works with Django 1.4 to 1.7 and matching Python versions (2.6 to 3.4).

.. warning::

   This a **beta** release. It is unsafe to use a beta release in a
   production environment. But feel free to experiment with it and report the
   bugs you may find!


Features
--------

- Works like the built-in Django related fields
- Creates one table per relation, like ``ManyToManyField``, and not one big
  table linking anything to anything (django-generic-m2m_'s default approach)
- No need to modify nor monkey-patch the existing model classes that need to be
  linked
- Automatic reverse relations_ ``<model_name>_set`` when an instance is added
- Related objects `prefetching`_
- `Through models`_
- `Deletion`_ behaviour customization (Django 1.6+)


Installation
------------

As straightforward as it can be, using ``pip``::

   pip install django-gm2m

You then need to add ``'gm2m'`` to your ``INSTALLED_APPS``.

You will obviously also need to have ``django.contrib.contenttypes`` enabled.


Quick start
-----------

You can use the exposed ``GM2MField`` exactly the same way as a
``ManyToManyField``.

Suppose you have some models describing videos types::

   from django.db import models

   class Video(models.Model):
      pass

   class Movie(Video):
      pass

   class Documentary(Video):
      pass

Now, if you want to have a field for the preferred videos of a User, you simply
need to add a default ``GM2MField`` to the ``User`` model::

   from gm2m import GM2MField

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField()

Now you can add videos to the ``preferred_videos`` set::

   user = User.objects.create()
   movie = Movie.objects.create()

   user.preferred_videos.add(movie)

or::

   user.preferred_videos = [movie]

You can obviously mix instances from different models::

   documentary = Documentary.objects.create()
   user.preferred_videos = [movie, documentary]


Relations
---------

From a ``User`` instance, you can now fetch all the user's preferred videos::

   list(user.preferred_videos)
   >>> [<Movie object>, <Documentary object>]

Note: yes, the ``>>>`` are misplaced. This is voluntary. ``>>>`` indicates an
output value rather than a console input, for the sake of readability.

The magic here is that, even without having to explicitly create reverse
relation (e.g by providing models to the ``GM2MField`` constructor), they are
automatically created when an instance of a yet unknown model is added. This
means that you can do::

   list(movie.user_set)
   >>> [<User object>]

However, it is important to remember that if no instance of a model as ever
been added to the set, retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` will raise an
``AttributeError``::

   class Opera(Video):
       pass
   opera = Opera.objects.create()
   list(opera.user_set)
   >>> AttributeError: 'Opera' object has no attribute 'user_set'
   user.preferred_videos.add(opera)
   list(opera.user_set)
   >>> [<User object>]

Indeed, the ``GM2MField`` has no idea what relation it is expected to create
until you provide it with a minimum of information.

However, if you want some reverse relations to be created before any instance
is added, so that retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` attribute never raises an
exception, it is possible to explicitly provide a list of models as arguments
of the ``GM2MField`` constructor. You may use model names if necessary to
avoid circular imports::

   class Concert(Video):
       pass

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_shows = GM2MField('Opera', Concert)

This way, the reverse relations are created when the model class is created
and available even if no instance has been added yet::

   concert = Concert.objects.create()
   list(concert.user_set)
   >>> []

If you need to add relations afterwards, or if the ``GM2MField`` is defined in
a third-party library you do not want to patch, you can still manually add
relations afterwards::

   class Theater(Video):
      pass
   User.preferred_shows.add_relation(Theater)

Note that providing models to ``GM2MField`` does not prevent you from adding
instances from other models.You can still add instances from other models, and
the relation will be created. Providing a list of models will only create
reverse relations by default, nothing more.

The reverse relations provide you with the full set of operations that normal
Django reverse relation exposes: ``add``, ``remove`` and ``clear``.


Deletion
--------

By default, when an instance from a source or target model is deleted, all
relations linking this instance are deleted. It is possible, if you are
using Django 1.6 or later, to change this behavior by using the ``on_delete``,
``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` keyword arguments when creating the
``GM2MField``::

   from gm2m.deletion import DO_NOTHING

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary', on_delete=DO_NOTHING)

If you only want this behaviour on one side of the relationship (e.g. on the
source model side), use ``on_delete_src`` or ``on_delete_tgt``::

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary',
                                   on_delete_src=DO_NOTHING)

``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` override ``on_delete``.

Several deletion functions are available:

CASCADE [default]
   The relation is deleted with the instance it is related to. The database
   remains consistent, no ``ForeignKey`` `nor ``GenericForeignKey`` can point
   to a non-existent object after the operation.

DO_NOTHING
   The relation is not deleted with the instance it is related to. It is your
   responsibility to ensure that the database remains consistent after the
   deletion operation.

CASCADE_SIGNAL
   Same as CASCADE but sends either the ``deleting_src`` or the
   ``deleting_tgt`` signal (see Signals_ below) depending on which side of the
   relation the deleted instance is.

CASCADE_SIGNAL_VETO
   Sends a ``deleting_src/tgt`` signal, and if no receiver vetoes the deletion
   by returning ``True`` or a Truthy value, calls CASCADE. Be careful using
   this one as when the deletion is vetoed, the database is left in an
   inconsistent state.

DO_NOTHING_SIGNAL
   Same as DO_NOTHING but sends a ``deleting_src/tgt`` signal.


Signals
-------

The signals listed below can be imported from the ``gm2m.signals`` module.

deleting_src
   Sent when instances involved in the source side of a GM2M relationship
   (= instances of the model where the ``GM2MField`` is defined) are being
   deleted. The receivers take the keyword argument ``objs`` as an iterable
   containing the objects being deleted. The ``sender`` is the model of the
   instance originating the cascade deletion.

deleting_tgt
   Same thing but for an instance on the target side of a GM2M relationship.

The deleting_src/tgt signals can be used to customize the behaviour when
deleting a source or target instance.


Prefetching
-----------

Prefetching works exactly the same way as with django ``ManyToManyField``::

   user.objects.prefetch_related('preferred_videos')

will, in a minimum number of queries, prefetch all the videos in all the user's
``preferred_video`` lists.


Through models
--------------

Through models are also supported. The minimum requirements for through model
classes are:

   - one ``ForeignKey`` to the source model
   - one ``GenericForeignKey`` with its ``ForeignKey`` and ``CharField``

For example::

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField(through='PreferredVideos')

   class PreferredVideos(models.Model):
      user = models.ForeignKey(User)
      video = GenericForeignKey(ct_field='video_ct', fk_field='video_fk')
      video_ct = models.ForeignKey(ContentType)
      video_fk = models.CharField(max_length=255)

      ... any relevant field (e.g. date added)


Other parameters
----------------

In addition to the specific ``on_delete*`` and ``through`` parameters, you can
use the following optional keyword arguments when defining a ``GM2MField``.
Most of them have the same signification than for Django's ``ManyToManyField``
or ``GenericForeignKey``.

verbose_name
   A human-readable name for the field. Defaults to a munged version of the
   model class name.

db_table
   The name of the database table to use for the model. Defaults to
   ``'<app_label>_<model_name>'``.

db_constraint
   Controls whether or not a constraint should be created in the database for
   the internal foreign keys when the through model is automatically created.
   Defaults to ``True``.

for_concrete_model
   If set to ``False``, the field will be able to reference proxy models.
   Default to ``True``.

related_name
   The name that will be used for the relation from a related object back to
   this one. The same related name is used for all the related models. Defaults
   to ``'<src_model_name>_set'``.

related_query_name
   The name to use for the reverse filter name from the target model.
   Defaults to the value of ``related_name`` or the name of the model.


Future improvements
-------------------

- Add Django admin and possibly ``limit_choices_to`` support


.. |copyright| unicode:: 0xA9

.. _django-generic-m2m: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-generic-m2m

Commit message:

Signal handler split in 2 for target and source model deletions

README.rst, after:

django-gm2m
===========

|copyright| 2014 Thomas Khyn

Django generic many-to-many field implementation.

This django application exposes a ``GM2MField`` that combines
the features of the standard Django ``ManyToManyField`` and
``GenericForeighKey`` and that can be used exactly the same way.

It works with Django 1.4 to 1.7 and matching Python versions (2.6 to 3.4).

.. warning::

   This a **beta** release. It is unsafe to use a beta release in a
   production environment. But feel free to experiment with it and report the
   bugs you may find!


Features
--------

- Works like the built-in Django related fields
- Creates one table per relation, like ``ManyToManyField``, and not one big
  table linking anything to anything (django-generic-m2m_'s default approach)
- No need to modify nor monkey-patch the existing model classes that need to be
  linked
- Automatic reverse relations_ ``<model_name>_set`` when an instance is added
- Related objects `prefetching`_
- `Through models`_
- `Deletion`_ behaviour customization (Django 1.6+)


Installation
------------

As straightforward as it can be, using ``pip``::

   pip install django-gm2m

You then need to add ``'gm2m'`` to your ``INSTALLED_APPS``.

You will obviously also need to have ``django.contrib.contenttypes`` enabled.


Quick start
-----------

You can use the exposed ``GM2MField`` exactly the same way as a
``ManyToManyField``.

Suppose you have some models describing videos types::

   from django.db import models

   class Video(models.Model):
      pass

   class Movie(Video):
      pass

   class Documentary(Video):
      pass

Now, if you want to have a field for the preferred videos of a User, you simply
need to add a default ``GM2MField`` to the ``User`` model::

   from gm2m import GM2MField

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField()

Now you can add videos to the ``preferred_videos`` set::

   user = User.objects.create()
   movie = Movie.objects.create()

   user.preferred_videos.add(movie)

or::

   user.preferred_videos = [movie]

You can obviously mix instances from different models::

   documentary = Documentary.objects.create()
   user.preferred_videos = [movie, documentary]


Relations
---------

From a ``User`` instance, you can now fetch all the user's preferred videos::

   list(user.preferred_videos)
   >>> [<Movie object>, <Documentary object>]

Note: yes, the ``>>>`` are misplaced. This is voluntary. ``>>>`` indicates an
output value rather than a console input, for the sake of readability.

The magic here is that, even without having to explicitly create reverse
relation (e.g by providing models to the ``GM2MField`` constructor), they are
automatically created when an instance of a yet unknown model is added. This
means that you can do::

   list(movie.user_set)
   >>> [<User object>]

However, it is important to remember that if no instance of a model as ever
been added to the set, retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` will raise an
``AttributeError``::

   class Opera(Video):
       pass
   opera = Opera.objects.create()
   list(opera.user_set)
   >>> AttributeError: 'Opera' object has no attribute 'user_set'
   user.preferred_videos.add(opera)
   list(opera.user_set)
   >>> [<User object>]

Indeed, the ``GM2MField`` has no idea what relation it is expected to create
until you provide it with a minimum of information.

However, if you want some reverse relations to be created before any instance
is added, so that retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` attribute never raises an
exception, it is possible to explicitly provide a list of models as arguments
of the ``GM2MField`` constructor. You may use model names if necessary to
avoid circular imports::

   class Concert(Video):
       pass

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_shows = GM2MField('Opera', Concert)

This way, the reverse relations are created when the model class is created
and available even if no instance has been added yet::

   concert = Concert.objects.create()
   list(concert.user_set)
   >>> []

If you need to add relations afterwards, or if the ``GM2MField`` is defined in
a third-party library you do not want to patch, you can still manually add
relations afterwards::

   class Theater(Video):
      pass
   User.preferred_shows.add_relation(Theater)

Note that providing models to ``GM2MField`` does not prevent you from adding
instances from other models.You can still add instances from other models, and
the relation will be created. Providing a list of models will only create
reverse relations by default, nothing more.

The reverse relations provide you with the full set of operations that normal
Django reverse relation exposes: ``add``, ``remove`` and ``clear``.


Deletion
--------

By default, when an instance from a source or target model is deleted, all
relations linking this instance are deleted. It is possible, if you are
using Django 1.6 or later, to change this behavior by using the ``on_delete``,
``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` keyword arguments when creating the
``GM2MField``::

   from gm2m.deletion import DO_NOTHING

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary', on_delete=DO_NOTHING)

If you only want this behaviour on one side of the relationship (e.g. on the
source model side), use ``on_delete_src`` or ``on_delete_tgt``::

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary',
                                   on_delete_src=DO_NOTHING)

``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` override ``on_delete``.

Several deletion functions are available:

CASCADE [default]
   The relation is deleted with the instance it is related to. The database
   remains consistent, no ``ForeignKey`` `nor ``GenericForeignKey`` can point
   to a non-existent object after the operation.

DO_NOTHING
   The relation is not deleted with the instance it is related to. It is your
   responsibility to ensure that the database remains consistent after the
   deletion operation.

CASCADE_SIGNAL
   Same as CASCADE but sends either the ``deleting_src`` or the
   ``deleting_tgt`` signal (see Signals_ below) depending on which side of the
   relation the deleted instance is.

CASCADE_SIGNAL_VETO
   Sends a ``deleting_src/tgt`` signal, and if no receiver vetoes the deletion
   by returning ``True`` or a Truthy value, calls CASCADE. Be careful using
   this one as when the deletion is vetoed, the database is left in an
   inconsistent state.

DO_NOTHING_SIGNAL
   Same as DO_NOTHING but sends a ``deleting_src/tgt`` signal.


Signals
-------

The signals listed below can be imported from the ``gm2m.signals`` module.

deleting_src
   Sent when instances involved in the source side of a GM2M relationship
   (= instances of the model where the ``GM2MField`` is defined) are being
   deleted. The receivers take 2 keyword arguments:
      - ``del_objs``, an iterable containing the objects being deleted in the
        first place
      - ``rel_objs``, an iterable containing the objects related to the objects
        in ``del_objs``, and that are to be deleted if cascade deletion is
        enabled
   The ``sender`` is the ``GM2MField`` instance.

deleting_tgt
   Same thing but for an instance on the target side of a GM2M relationship.

The deleting_src/tgt signals can be used to customize the behaviour when
deleting a source or target instance.


Prefetching
-----------

Prefetching works exactly the same way as with django ``ManyToManyField``::

   user.objects.prefetch_related('preferred_videos')

will, in a minimum number of queries, prefetch all the videos in all the user's
``preferred_video`` lists.


Through models
--------------

Through models are also supported. The minimum requirements for through model
classes are:

   - one ``ForeignKey`` to the source model
   - one ``GenericForeignKey`` with its ``ForeignKey`` and ``CharField``

For example::

   class User(models.Model):
      preferred_videos = GM2MField(through='PreferredVideos')

   class PreferredVideos(models.Model):
      user = models.ForeignKey(User)
      video = GenericForeignKey(ct_field='video_ct', fk_field='video_fk')
      video_ct = models.ForeignKey(ContentType)
      video_fk = models.CharField(max_length=255)

      ... any relevant field (e.g. date added)


Other parameters
----------------

In addition to the specific ``on_delete*`` and ``through`` parameters, you can
use the following optional keyword arguments when defining a ``GM2MField``.
Most of them have the same signification than for Django's ``ManyToManyField``
or ``GenericForeignKey``.

verbose_name
   A human-readable name for the field. Defaults to a munged version of the
   model class name.

db_table
   The name of the database table to use for the model. Defaults to
   ``'<app_label>_<model_name>'``.

db_constraint
   Controls whether or not a constraint should be created in the database for
   the internal foreign keys when the through model is automatically created.
   Defaults to ``True``.

for_concrete_model
   If set to ``False``, the field will be able to reference proxy models.
   Default to ``True``.

related_name
   The name that will be used for the relation from a related object back to
   this one. The same related name is used for all the related models. Defaults
   to ``'<src_model_name>_set'``.

related_query_name
   The name to use for the reverse filter name from the target model.
   Defaults to the value of ``related_name`` or the name of the model.


Future improvements
-------------------

- Add Django admin and possibly ``limit_choices_to`` support


.. |copyright| unicode:: 0xA9

.. _django-generic-m2m: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-generic-m2m
