doc/features.rst, before:

.. _features:

Features
========


django-gm2m...

- Works like the built-in Django related fields
- Creates one table per relation, like ``ManyToManyField``, and not one big
  table linking anything to anything (django-generic-m2m_'s default approach)
- Does not require you to modify nor monkey-patch the existing model classes
  that need to be linked
- Provides automatic `reverse relations`_ when an instance is added
- Enables related objects prefetching_
- Allows the use of `Through models`_
- Allows you to customize the deletion_ behaviour
- Supports migrations_


In this page, we'll make use of the models that were described in the
:ref:`quick-start` section::

   >>> from django.db import models
   >>> from gm2m import GM2MField
   >>>
   >>> class Video(models.Model):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class Movie(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class Documentary(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_videos = GM2MField()


Reverse relations
-----------------

We've seen how you could access all the ``preferred_videos`` of a given user.
But what if you want to access all the users that have bookmarked a given
video? ``django-gm2m`` provides that out of the box, with a bit of magic.

Indeed, even without having to explicitly create reverse relations (e.g by
providing models to the ``GM2MField`` constructor), they are automatically
created when an instance of a yet unknown model is added. This means that after
having added ``movie`` to a ``User``'s ``preferred_videos``, you can do::

   >>> list(movie.user_set)
   [<User object>]

However, it is important to remember that if no instance of a model has ever
been added to the set, retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` will raise an
``AttributeError``::

   >>> class Opera(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> opera = Opera.objects.create()
   >>> list(opera.user_set)
   AttributeError: 'Opera' object has no attribute 'user_set'
   >>>
   >>> user.preferred_videos.add(opera)
   >>> list(opera.user_set)
   [<User object>]

Indeed, the ``GM2MField`` has no idea what relation it is expected to create
until you provide it with a minimum of information.

However, if you want some reverse relations to be created before any instance
is added, so that retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` attribute never raises an
exception, it is possible to explicitly provide some models to the ``GM2MField``
constructor. You may use model names if necessary to avoid circular imports::

   >>> class Concert(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_shows = GM2MField('Opera', Concert)

This way, the reverse relations are created when the model class is created
and available even if no instance has been added yet::

   >>> concert = Concert.objects.create()
   >>> list(concert.user_set)
   []

If you need to add relations afterwards, or if the ``GM2MField`` is defined in
a third-party library you cannot or do not want to patch, you can still manually
add relations afterwards::

   >>> class Theater(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>> User.preferred_shows.add_relation(Theater)

Note that providing models to ``GM2MField`` does not prevent you from adding
instances from other models. You can still add instances from other models, and
the relation will be created. Providing a list of models will only create
reverse relations by default, nothing more.

The reverse relations provide you with the full set of operations that normal
Django reverse relation exposes: ``add``, ``remove`` and ``clear``. ``set`` is
also available from version 0.4.2.

A reverse relation also enables you to use lookup chains in your queries::

   >>> class Fan(models.Model):
   >>>    name = models.CharField(max_length=32)
   >>>    preferred_shows = GM2MField(Opera)

   >>> jack = Fan.objects.create(name='Jack')
   >>> jack.preferred_shows.add(Opera.objects.create(title='The Bartered Bride'))
   >>> [o.name for o in Opera.objects.filter(fan__name='Jack')]
   ['The Bartered Bride']


Deletion
--------

By default, when a source or target model instance is deleted, all relations
linking this instance are deleted. It is possible to change this behavior with
the ``on_delete``, ``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` keyword arguments
when creating the ``GM2MField``::

   >>> from gm2m.deletion import DO_NOTHING
   >>>
   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary',
   >>>                                  on_delete=DO_NOTHING)

If you only want this behaviour on one side of the relationship (e.g. on the
source model side), use ``on_delete_src`` or ``on_delete_tgt``::

   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>    preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary',
   >>>                                 on_delete_src=DO_NOTHING)

``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` override ``on_delete``.

Several deletion functions are available:

CASCADE [default]
   The relation is deleted with the instance it is related to. The database
   remains consistent, no ``ForeignKey`` nor ``GenericForeignKey`` can point
   to a non-existent object after the operation.

DO_NOTHING
   The relation is not deleted with the instance it is related to. It is your
   responsibility to ensure that the database remains consistent after the
   deletion operation.

CASCADE_SIGNAL
   Same as CASCADE but sends the ``deleting`` signal (see Signals_ below).

CASCADE_SIGNAL_VETO
   Sends a ``deleting`` signal, and if no receiver vetoes the deletion
   by returning ``True`` or a Truthy value, calls CASCADE. Be careful using
   this one as when the deletion is vetoed, the database is left in an
   inconsistent state.

DO_NOTHING_SIGNAL
   Same as DO_NOTHING but sends a ``deleting`` signal.


Signals
-------

The signals listed below can be imported from the ``gm2m.signals`` module.

deleting
   Sent when source model (= where the ``GM2MField`` is defined) instances are
   deleted. The ``sender`` is the ``GM2MField`` instance. The receivers take
   2 keyword arguments:

   - ``del_objs``, an iterable containing the objects being deleted in the
     first place
   - ``rel_objs``, an iterable containing the objects related to the objects
     in ``del_objs``, and that are to be deleted if cascade deletion is
     enabled

   This signal can be used to customize the behaviour when deleting a source
   or target instance.


Prefetching
-----------

Prefetching works exactly the same way as with django ``ManyToManyField``::

   >>> user.objects.all().prefetch_related('preferred_videos')

will, in a minimum number of queries, prefetch all the videos in all the user's
``preferred_video`` lists.


Through models
--------------

Custom through models are also supported. The minimum requirements for through
model classes are:

   - one ``ForeignKey`` to the source model
   - one ``GenericForeignKey`` with its ``ForeignKey`` and ``CharField``

For example::

   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_videos = GM2MField(through='PreferredVideos')
   >>>
   >>> class PreferredVideos(models.Model):
   >>>     user = models.ForeignKey(User)
   >>>     video = GenericForeignKey(ct_field='video_ct', fk_field='video_fk')
   >>>     video_ct = models.ForeignKey(ContentType)
   >>>     video_fk = models.CharField(max_length=255)
   >>>
   >>>     ... any relevant field (e.g. date added)

If there is only one ForeignKey to the source model (User in the above example)
and only one GenericForeignKey in the target model, they will automatically be
used for the relationship. Otherwise, if there are more of them, you must
provide a ``through_fields`` argument (a list or tuple of 2 to 4 field names) to
the ``GM2MField`` constructor.


GM2MField constructor's other parameters
----------------------------------------

In addition to the specific ``on_delete*`` and ``through`` / ``through_fields``
parameters, you can use the following optional keyword arguments when defining
a ``GM2MField``. For the sake of consistency, they have the same signification
as in Django's ``ManyToManyField`` and ``GenericForeignKey``.

verbose_name
   A human-readable name for the field. Defaults to a munged version of the
   model class name.

db_table
   The name of the database table to use for the automatically created through
   model. Defaults to ``'<app_label>_<model_name>'``.

db_constraint
   Controls whether or not a constraint should be created in the database for
   the internal foreign keys when the through model is automatically created.
   Defaults to ``True``.

for_concrete_model
   If set to ``False``, the field will be able to reference proxy models.
   Defaults to ``True``.

related_name
   The name that will be used for the relation from a related object back to
   this one. The same related name is used for all the related models. Defaults
   to ``'<src_model_name>_set'``.

related_query_name
   The name to use for the reverse filter name from the target model.
   Defaults to the value of ``related_name`` or the model name.

pk_maxlength
   This is useful when using an automatically created intermediate model, to
   specify the length of the ``CharField`` used to store primary keys in the
   ``GenericForeignKey``. Indeed, the default value of 16 characters may not
   be sufficient to accomodate certain large foreign key values (e.g. UUIDs).
   Use ``None`` if you don't want any limitation (this may cause performance
   issues, though). Defaults to ``16``.


Migrations
----------

``django-gm2m`` fully supports `Django migrations`_.

When generating migrations for an app using ``GM2MField``, do not be surprised
to see a ``through_fields`` keyword argument (as a list containing 4 field
names) in the migration even if you did not provide it when creating the
``GM2MField`` in your model. This is necessary for django's migrations system
to keep track of the arguments assignment and build accurate model
representations from the migrations.


System checks
-------------

``django-gm2m`` adds a few system checks, derived from built-in django checks
for related fields and many to many fields. Here are the errors they may raise,
with the builtin counterpart between brackets:

gm2m.E001 [fields.E330]
   GM2MFields cannot be unique

gm2m.E101 [fields.E331]
   Field specifies a many-to-many relation through model which has not been
   installed

gm2m.E102 [fields.E333]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have a foreign key to
   the source model

gm2m.E103 [fields.E334]
   The model used as an intermediate model has more than one foreign key to
   the source model, which is ambiguous (the one that is used is the first
   declared in the model)

gm2m.E104 [fields.E333]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have a generic foreign
   key

gm2m.E105 [fields.E334]
   The model used as an intermediate model has more than one generic
   foreign key, which is ambiguous (the one that is used is the first declared
   in the model).

gm2m.E106 [fields.E337]
   The field specifies ``through_fields`` but does not provide the names of the
   two link fields that should be used for the relation through model

gm2m.E107 [fields.E338]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have the field specified
   in ``through_fields``

gm2m.E108 [fields.E339]
   The field specified in ``through_fields`` is not a foreign key to the
   source model

gm2m.E109 [fields.E338]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have the generic foreign
   key field specified in ``through_fields``

gm2m.E110 [fields.E339]
   The field specified in ``through_fields`` is not a generic foreign key

gm2m.E201 [fieldsE301]
   Field defines a relation with a model that has been swapped out

gm2m.E202 [fields.E302]
   Reverse accessor for the field clashes with a field from the target model

gm2m.E203 [fields.E303]
   Reverse query name for the field clashes with a field from the target model

gm2m.E204 [fields.E304]
   Reverse accessor for the field clashes with reverse accessor from another
   field

gm2m.E205 [fields.E305]
   Reverse accessor for the field clashes with reverse query name from another
   field


Future improvements
-------------------

- Add Django admin and possibly ``limit_choices_to`` support


.. _django-generic-m2m: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-generic-m2m
.. _`Django migrations`: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/migrations/

Commit message:

[fix #25] Adds a warning regarding automatic reverse relations

doc/features.rst, after:

.. _features:

Features
========


django-gm2m...

- Works like the built-in Django related fields
- Creates one table per relation, like ``ManyToManyField``, and not one big
  table linking anything to anything (django-generic-m2m_'s default approach)
- Does not require you to modify nor monkey-patch the existing model classes
  that need to be linked
- Provides automatic `reverse relations`_ when an instance is added
- Enables related objects prefetching_
- Allows the use of `Through models`_
- Allows you to customize the deletion_ behaviour
- Supports migrations_


In this page, we'll make use of the models that were described in the
:ref:`quick-start` section::

   >>> from django.db import models
   >>> from gm2m import GM2MField
   >>>
   >>> class Video(models.Model):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class Movie(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class Documentary(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_videos = GM2MField()


Reverse relations
-----------------

We've seen how you could access all the ``preferred_videos`` of a given user.
But what if you want to access all the users that have bookmarked a given
video? ``django-gm2m`` provides that out of the box, with a bit of magic.

Indeed, even without having to explicitly create reverse relations (e.g by
providing models to the ``GM2MField`` constructor), they are automatically
created when an instance of a yet unknown model is added. This means that after
having added ``movie`` to a ``User``'s ``preferred_videos``, you can do::

   >>> list(movie.user_set)
   [<User object>]

However, it is important to remember that if no instance of a model has ever
been added to the set, retrieving the ``<modelname_set>`` will raise an
``AttributeError``::

   >>> class Opera(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> opera = Opera.objects.create()
   >>> list(opera.user_set)
   AttributeError: 'Opera' object has no attribute 'user_set'
   >>>
   >>> user.preferred_videos.add(opera)
   >>> list(opera.user_set)
   [<User object>]

Indeed, the ``GM2MField`` has no idea what relation it is expected to create
until you provide it with a minimum of information.

.. warning::
   In the same way, if automatic relations have been added during a session,
   be aware that these will not be available in another session. If you restart
   your server, for example, the automatic relations will be lost. Read on to
   find how to tackle this issue.

However, if your code relies on some of these reverse relations, they will need
to be there even if no item has ever been added or just after a server restart.
In this use case, it is possible to explicitly provide some models to the
``GM2MField`` constructor so that retrieving the ``<modelname_set>``
attribute never raises an exception. You may use model names if necessary to
avoid circular imports::

   >>> class Concert(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>>
   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_shows = GM2MField('Opera', Concert)

This way, the reverse relations are created when the model class is created
and available even if no instance has been added yet::

   >>> concert = Concert.objects.create()
   >>> list(concert.user_set)
   []

If you need to add relations afterwards, or if the ``GM2MField`` is defined in
a third-party library you cannot or do not want to patch, you can still manually
add relations afterwards::

   >>> class Theater(Video):
   >>>     pass
   >>> User.preferred_shows.add_relation(Theater)

Note that providing models to ``GM2MField`` does not prevent you from adding
instances from other models. You can still add instances from other models, and
the relation will be created. Providing a list of models will only create
reverse relations by default, nothing more.

The reverse relations provide you with the full set of operations that normal
Django reverse relation exposes: ``add``, ``remove`` and ``clear``. ``set`` is
also available from version 0.4.2.

A reverse relation also enables you to use lookup chains in your queries::

   >>> class Fan(models.Model):
   >>>    name = models.CharField(max_length=32)
   >>>    preferred_shows = GM2MField(Opera)

   >>> jack = Fan.objects.create(name='Jack')
   >>> jack.preferred_shows.add(Opera.objects.create(title='The Bartered Bride'))
   >>> [o.name for o in Opera.objects.filter(fan__name='Jack')]
   ['The Bartered Bride']


Deletion
--------

By default, when a source or target model instance is deleted, all relations
linking this instance are deleted. It is possible to change this behavior with
the ``on_delete``, ``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` keyword arguments
when creating the ``GM2MField``::

   >>> from gm2m.deletion import DO_NOTHING
   >>>
   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary',
   >>>                                  on_delete=DO_NOTHING)

If you only want this behaviour on one side of the relationship (e.g. on the
source model side), use ``on_delete_src`` or ``on_delete_tgt``::

   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>    preferred_videos = GM2MField(Movie, 'Documentary',
   >>>                                 on_delete_src=DO_NOTHING)

``on_delete_src`` and ``on_delete_tgt`` override ``on_delete``.

Several deletion functions are available:

CASCADE [default]
   The relation is deleted with the instance it is related to. The database
   remains consistent, no ``ForeignKey`` nor ``GenericForeignKey`` can point
   to a non-existent object after the operation.

DO_NOTHING
   The relation is not deleted with the instance it is related to. It is your
   responsibility to ensure that the database remains consistent after the
   deletion operation.

CASCADE_SIGNAL
   Same as CASCADE but sends the ``deleting`` signal (see Signals_ below).

CASCADE_SIGNAL_VETO
   Sends a ``deleting`` signal, and if no receiver vetoes the deletion
   by returning ``True`` or a Truthy value, calls CASCADE. Be careful using
   this one as when the deletion is vetoed, the database is left in an
   inconsistent state.

DO_NOTHING_SIGNAL
   Same as DO_NOTHING but sends a ``deleting`` signal.


Signals
-------

The signals listed below can be imported from the ``gm2m.signals`` module.

deleting
   Sent when source model (= where the ``GM2MField`` is defined) instances are
   deleted. The ``sender`` is the ``GM2MField`` instance. The receivers take
   2 keyword arguments:

   - ``del_objs``, an iterable containing the objects being deleted in the
     first place
   - ``rel_objs``, an iterable containing the objects related to the objects
     in ``del_objs``, and that are to be deleted if cascade deletion is
     enabled

   This signal can be used to customize the behaviour when deleting a source
   or target instance.


Prefetching
-----------

Prefetching works exactly the same way as with django ``ManyToManyField``::

   >>> user.objects.all().prefetch_related('preferred_videos')

will, in a minimum number of queries, prefetch all the videos in all the user's
``preferred_video`` lists.


Through models
--------------

Custom through models are also supported. The minimum requirements for through
model classes are:

   - one ``ForeignKey`` to the source model
   - one ``GenericForeignKey`` with its ``ForeignKey`` and ``CharField``

For example::

   >>> class User(models.Model):
   >>>     preferred_videos = GM2MField(through='PreferredVideos')
   >>>
   >>> class PreferredVideos(models.Model):
   >>>     user = models.ForeignKey(User)
   >>>     video = GenericForeignKey(ct_field='video_ct', fk_field='video_fk')
   >>>     video_ct = models.ForeignKey(ContentType)
   >>>     video_fk = models.CharField(max_length=255)
   >>>
   >>>     ... any relevant field (e.g. date added)

If there is only one ForeignKey to the source model (User in the above example)
and only one GenericForeignKey in the target model, they will automatically be
used for the relationship. Otherwise, if there are more of them, you must
provide a ``through_fields`` argument (a list or tuple of 2 to 4 field names) to
the ``GM2MField`` constructor.


GM2MField constructor's other parameters
----------------------------------------

In addition to the specific ``on_delete*`` and ``through`` / ``through_fields``
parameters, you can use the following optional keyword arguments when defining
a ``GM2MField``. For the sake of consistency, they have the same signification
as in Django's ``ManyToManyField`` and ``GenericForeignKey``.

verbose_name
   A human-readable name for the field. Defaults to a munged version of the
   model class name.

db_table
   The name of the database table to use for the automatically created through
   model. Defaults to ``'<app_label>_<model_name>'``.

db_constraint
   Controls whether or not a constraint should be created in the database for
   the internal foreign keys when the through model is automatically created.
   Defaults to ``True``.

for_concrete_model
   If set to ``False``, the field will be able to reference proxy models.
   Defaults to ``True``.

related_name
   The name that will be used for the relation from a related object back to
   this one. The same related name is used for all the related models. Defaults
   to ``'<src_model_name>_set'``.

related_query_name
   The name to use for the reverse filter name from the target model.
   Defaults to the value of ``related_name`` or the model name.

pk_maxlength
   This is useful when using an automatically created intermediate model, to
   specify the length of the ``CharField`` used to store primary keys in the
   ``GenericForeignKey``. Indeed, the default value of 16 characters may not
   be sufficient to accomodate certain large foreign key values (e.g. UUIDs).
   Use ``None`` if you don't want any limitation (this may cause performance
   issues, though). Defaults to ``16``.


Migrations
----------

``django-gm2m`` fully supports `Django migrations`_.

When generating migrations for an app using ``GM2MField``, do not be surprised
to see a ``through_fields`` keyword argument (as a list containing 4 field
names) in the migration even if you did not provide it when creating the
``GM2MField`` in your model. This is necessary for django's migrations system
to keep track of the arguments assignment and build accurate model
representations from the migrations.


System checks
-------------

``django-gm2m`` adds a few system checks, derived from built-in django checks
for related fields and many to many fields. Here are the errors they may raise,
with the builtin counterpart between brackets:

gm2m.E001 [fields.E330]
   GM2MFields cannot be unique

gm2m.E101 [fields.E331]
   Field specifies a many-to-many relation through model which has not been
   installed

gm2m.E102 [fields.E333]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have a foreign key to
   the source model

gm2m.E103 [fields.E334]
   The model used as an intermediate model has more than one foreign key to
   the source model, which is ambiguous (the one that is used is the first
   declared in the model)

gm2m.E104 [fields.E333]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have a generic foreign
   key

gm2m.E105 [fields.E334]
   The model used as an intermediate model has more than one generic
   foreign key, which is ambiguous (the one that is used is the first declared
   in the model).

gm2m.E106 [fields.E337]
   The field specifies ``through_fields`` but does not provide the names of the
   two link fields that should be used for the relation through model

gm2m.E107 [fields.E338]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have the field specified
   in ``through_fields``

gm2m.E108 [fields.E339]
   The field specified in ``through_fields`` is not a foreign key to the
   source model

gm2m.E109 [fields.E338]
   The model used as an intermediate model does not have the generic foreign
   key field specified in ``through_fields``

gm2m.E110 [fields.E339]
   The field specified in ``through_fields`` is not a generic foreign key

gm2m.E201 [fieldsE301]
   Field defines a relation with a model that has been swapped out

gm2m.E202 [fields.E302]
   Reverse accessor for the field clashes with a field from the target model

gm2m.E203 [fields.E303]
   Reverse query name for the field clashes with a field from the target model

gm2m.E204 [fields.E304]
   Reverse accessor for the field clashes with reverse accessor from another
   field

gm2m.E205 [fields.E305]
   Reverse accessor for the field clashes with reverse query name from another
   field


Future improvements
-------------------

- Add Django admin and possibly ``limit_choices_to`` support


.. _django-generic-m2m: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/django-generic-m2m
.. _`Django migrations`: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/migrations/
